{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
{\info
{\author Peter}}\margl1134\margr1134\margb1134\margt1134\vieww12240\viewh14100\viewkind1
\deftab567
\pard\pardeftab567\li432\fi-432\ri0\sb240\sa120\ql\qnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs24 \cf0 	
\f1\fs52 LIGO-Virgo Event Follow-up Program
\b\fs48 \
\pard\pardeftab567\ri0\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab567\ri0\ql\qnatural

\f2\fs20 \cf0 This form will be attached to the Memorandum of Understanding.
\f1\fs24 \
\
\pard\pardeftab567\ri0\ql\qnatural

\f2\b \cf0 Full name of the partner project:
\b0  Large Synoptic Survey Telescope Electromagnetic/Gravitational Wave Working Group, on behalf of the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope Transients and Variable Stars science collaboration
\f1 \
\

\f2\b Abbreviated name:
\b0  LSST EM/GW
\f1 \
\

\f2 Project web site (if available): http://www.lsst.org\
\

\b Name, institution, email and title of the leader(s) (who will sign the MOU): \

\b0 Lucianne Walkowicz, Princeton University/Adler Planetarium, l.m.walkowicz@gmail.com\
Ashish Mahabal, California Institute of Technology, aam@astro.caltech.edu
\f1 \
\

\f2\b Name, institution, email, and phone numbers of the liaison with LVC:\

\b0 Lucianne Walkowicz, Princeton University/Adler Planetarium, l.m.walkowicz@gmail.com, (206) 291 - 8174\
Ashish Mahabal, California Institute of Technology, aam@astro.caltech.edu, +1 626 395 4201
\f1 \
\
\

\f2\b List of associated members (name, institution and email):\

\b0 Lucianne Walkowicz, Princeton/Adler Planetarium\
Ashish Mahabal, California Institute of Technology\
Edo Berger, Harvard University\
Josh Bloom, UC Berkeley\
S. Bradley Cenko, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center\
Kem Cook, Academica Sinica\
Brenda Frye, University of Arizona\
Daniel Holz, University of Chicago\
Zeljko Ivezic, University of Washington\
Mansi Kasliwal, Carnegie Observatories/Princeton\
Shri Kulkarni, California Institute of Technologt\
Samaya Nissanke, University of Colorado, Boulder\
Eran Ofek, California Institute of Technology\
Abhijit Saha, NOAO\
Rob Seaman, NOAO
\f1 \
\

\f2\b List one or more published papers as examples of your work, preferably relevant to this kind of project:\

\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\f1 \cf0 Nissanke, Kasliwal, Georgieva arXiv:1210.6362)
\f2 \
\pard\pardeftab567\ri0\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Mahabal et al. 
\f1 arXiv:1201.1281
\f2 \
\

\b What telescope(s) / instruments do you plan to use (name(s), plus journal ref(s), web site(s), or description):\

\b0 \
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) is a 8.4m telescope that will be built on the summit of Cerro Pachon (Chile). LSST will observe the sky in 6 bands (between 0.3 and 1.1 microns), reaching a single visit depth of r~24.5 over a 9.6 degree field of view. LSST will produce alerts within 60 seconds for transient and variable objects, and these alerts will be publicly available to the global community. \
\

\b What is your access to the telescope(s) or facilities?  (e.g. do you own them; own a share of their time; have been awarded a time allocation; will propose for time; etc.)\

\b0 \
LSST is a public survey facility: its data will be immediately public to the US and Chilean communities, as well as to global LSST partner institutions. The signatories of this MOU are members of the LSST Science Collaborations, standing working groups that provide scientifically motivated feedback to survey design choices. In the coming years before first light, the signatories will work with the LSST project to implement a form of Target of Opportunity observing that may provide prompt observations of LVS events.\
\

\b How do you plan to use them for this project?\

\b0 \
At present, LSST is expected to see first light in 2021, well after the anticipated first events from Advanced LIGO. Additional GW detectors (e.g. Kagra and others) are expected to be online when the LSST survey starts. The GW sky localization would then be expected to be within a single pointing of LSST in many cases, thus making it much easier and feasible to carry out ToO observations with the LSST. The exact fraction of time that can be allocated to ToO interrupts is not clear at the present time. The Transients and Variable Stars science collaboration (represented by the LSST EM/GW signatories named above) will be studying the effects of ToO frequency and cadence choices on the overall survey design, and will be providing direct feedback to the project on recommended observing modes. \
\
In addition, the LSST survey observations and associated products gathered during the course of baseline survey operations (e.g. lists of alerts, deep co-added images, and galaxy catalogs) will serve to characterize the deep sky in the vicinity of a LVS event, providing superior false positive rejection. \
\

\b How promptly do you expect to be able to have results?\

\b0 \
The LSST Transients and Variable Stars science collaboration members will be working to immediately analyze transients and variable events with LSST, based on alerts delivered within 60 seconds of observations. We anticipate that the collaboration will be able to promptly provide counterpart identification and false positive vetting for potential GW counterparts. \
\

\b Have you used these scopes / instruments before?\

\b0 \
LSST is a future facility. \
\

\b How will you evaluate the significance of any apparent counterpart you find?  That is, how will you quantify the false coincidence probability?\

\b0 \
\
LSST's instantaneous field of view, aperture, speed and wavelength coverage make it one of the few facilities capable of tiling the error region to the required depth for early LIGO GW events. Furthermore, LSST's ability to characterize the faint variable sky will significantly improve the ability to identify potential EM false positives. }